Diwali, well known as the festival of lights, is a festival that is celebrated in almost all parts of India. It is an Indian festival that marks the victory of good over bad (evil). It is a festival celebrated by Indians with great enthusiasm. The festival commemorates joy, harmony and victory. It also marks the return of Lord Ram from exile, which is described in the epic Ramayana.Diwali is also called Deepavali, where Deep means light and Avali means an array of lights. So this festival is celebrated by lighting lamps (usually earthen lamps) all around the house/office. Thus, it becomes the festival of lights. It also symbolises light as the victory over darkness. Generally, according to the stars, the date for Diwali falls in October or November and is expected to be 20 days after Dussehra. It is celebrated in the Hindu month called Kartika. Elaborate Essay on Diwali
Diwali is a festival of lights. It is one of the biggest and grandest festivals celebrated mainly in India. Diwali is a festival commemorated to mark joy, victory and harmony. Diwali, also known as Deepavali, falls during the month of October or November. It is celebrated after 20 days of the Dussehra festival. The word ‘Deepavali’ is a Hindi word which means an array of lamps (‘Deep’ means earthen lamps and ‘Avali’ means a queue or an array).
Diwali is celebrated in the honour of Lord Ramchandra because on this day Lord Rama returned to Ayodhya after 14 years of exile. During this exile period, he fought with demons and the demon king Ravana who was the powerful ruler of Lanka. On Rama’s return, people of Ayodhya lit diyas to welcome him and celebrate his victory. Since then, Diwali is celebrated to declare the victory of good over evil.
In India, it is a festival of fun and happiness. People decorate their homes and offices with various lights, cook delicious food, exchange gifts, and share happiness. At places of business, many consider Diwali as the start of their financial new year. Goddess Lakshmi (God of wealth) is worshipped with great devotion on the Third Day of the 5-day long festival. 
The five days are Dhanteras, Naraka Chaturdashi, Lakshmi Pooja, Govardhan Pooja, and Bhai Dooj. Diwali preparations have an important significance for Indians. The preparations start from one month before the actual date of the festival and people indulge in buying new clothes, gifts, new books, lights, crackers, sweets, dry fruits, etc.
Some also believe in discarding old things and buying new ones, a refresher once in a year. This also involves discarding unused old items at home and buying new ones in the name of Diwali, so the festival brings in everything fresh and new. It is believed that Goddess Lakshmi visits the place of worship (maybe house or office) on Diwali and blesses them. Hence there is a lot of discipline and devotion that goes into the celebration of this festival. 
On the day of the festival, courtyards are decorated with colourful rangoli, and lamps are lit on the rangoli. People dress in new clothes, eat the delicacies, light lamps, and as the sun sets, they burst crackers. Crackers not only make noise but are also fun to play with during the festival. 
However, considering the environmental pollution, it is good not to burn too many crackers, and also they are not safe as they are made of harmful material. There are many instances where kids hurt themselves while bursting crackers. It is important to burst crackers only under adult supervision. Also, it is best to reduce the number of crackers you burst as it causes a lot of air and noise pollution. Noise also hurts animals, and they get scared. 
So let us not forget the environment and the animals to which these crackers cause harm. We can still enjoy the festivities with just the lights and have fun. However, to keep up the tradition, we can just burst a few crackers and celebrate in an eco-friendly way. 
People also worship goddess Lakshmi and Lord Ganesha on the eve of Diwali. Lord Ganesha, known as a demolisher of obstacles, is worshipped for wisdom and intellect. Also, Goddess Lakshmi is worshipped on the occasion of Diwali for wealth and prosperity. Diwali puja is said to evoke the blessings of these deities.
The preparation for the festival commences many days prior to the festival. It starts with the thorough cleaning of houses and shops. Many people also discard all the old household items and get all the renovation work done before the onset of the festival. It is believed that Goddess Lakshmi visits people’s houses on Diwali night to bless them. Hence, all the devotees clean and decorate their houses with fairy lights, flowers, rangoli, candles, diyas, garlands etc. for the festival. The festival is usually celebrated for three days. The first day is called Dhanteras on which there is a tradition to buy new items, especially ornaments. The next days are to celebrate Diwali when people burst crackers and adorn their houses. There is also a custom to visit your friends and families and exchange gifts. Lots of sweets and Indian specialities are prepared on this occasion.
Diwali is a festival enjoyed by everyone. Amid all the festivities, we tend to forget that bursting crackers lead to noise and air pollution. It can be very dangerous for kids and can even cause fatal burns. Bursting crackers reduces air-quality index and visibility at many places which are responsible for accidents that are often reported after the festival. Hence, it is important to have a safe and eco-friendly Diwali.
Diwali is rightly called the festival of light as the whole world brightens up on this day. The festival brings joy and hence, it is my favourite festival!
It is aptly given the name Diwali as the whole world lights up on this day of the festival. Many satellite images show how India looks on Diwali. These days Indians all over the world celebrate Diwali by lighting lamps, and hence it is a global festival. So let us all join hands and take an oath to celebrate this traditional festival with responsibility so that everyone, including mother earth, is safe and free from pollution.